California recreational total mortality estimates in the "rockfish genus" were inflated during the Covid pandemic due to modified sampling protocols that prevented CRFS samplers from closely examining and identifying fish to species. The modified sampling protocols instructed CRFS samplers to maintain a 6-foot distance from anglers, refrain from pulling out and sharing fish ID guides, boarding any vessels, and touching common items from the boat. This meant that species identification and enumeration of observed fish could only occur when anglers could present fish for observation. In addition, PC onboard assignments were cancelled and replaced with PC dockside sampling assignments starting in July 2020 (when modified sampling started after all modes of CRFS sampling were cancelled in April, May, and June 2020). PC dockside sampling can result in increased reporting of “rockfish genus” because PC dockside interviews are completed as the angler is exiting the boat meaning their fish may be filleted and that they may not be willing to spend as much time being interviewed by the CRFS sampler. 

Sampling protocol was modified again in late March 2021 to improve species ID for rockfish. This reduced the amount of “rockfish genus” particularly in the PR, BB, and MM modes but “rockfish genus” remained inflated for the PC mode because PC onboard sampling did not resume until August 2021 when CRFS returned to normal sampling protocols. 

An effort was made to allocate some of the rockfish genus mortality to other rockfish species for these modes and years.  An expected value of rockfish genus mortality in 2020 and 2021 was generated by mode, year, and district according to the average proportion to the total rockfish mortality this category represented in 2018 and 2019, when regulations were consistent with 2020 and 2021.  Mortality above this expected value was attributed to the other species also based on proportions each species represented to the total from 2018 and 2019.  The shore-based modes were grouped in with the PR mode.  Calculations were initially made in numbers of fish because rockfish genus mortality is only recorded this way.  Numbers of fish by species were then converted to weight in kilograms based on average weights of fish recorded by the CRFS program by district in 2019.  Original values posted in the genus_allocate_20230602.csv table represent the unaltered CRFS mortality estimates from RecFIN in both the numbers and weight of fish.  The allocated values in that table represent the amounts of mortality originally recorded in the “rockfish genus” category that are being allocated to individual species.  The original and allocated values should be added to estimate species-specific mortality for those months when CRFS sampling occurred.  


